DOCSP-30555: transactions guide (#87)
mongodb/docs-rust: source/fundamentals/transactions.txt

.. _rust-transactions:

============
Transactions
============

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: code example, ACID compliance, multi-document

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {driver-short} to perform
**transactions**. Transactions allow you to perform a series of operations
that change data only if the entire transaction is committed.
If any operation in the transaction does not succeed, the driver stops the
transaction and discards all data changes before they ever become

> visible. This feature is called atomicity.

Reviewer: S: I feel like bolding "atomicity" here would be good

In MongoDB, transactions run within logical sessions. A
session is a grouping of related read or write operations that you
want to run sequentially. Sessions enable causal consistency for a group

> of operations and allow you to execute operations in an ACID-compliant transaction.

Reviewer: S: unsure if you need to add definitions of "causal consistency" and "ACID-compliant" or if we should just assume that the reader knows what these mean, but I think explaining ACID at least would help clarify. I.e., "... in an ACID-compliant transaction, or a transaction that maintains the atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability of the database"

MongoDB guarantees that the data involved in your transaction operations
remains consistent, even if the operations encounter unexpected errors.

> In the {+driver-short+}, you can create a new session from a
> ``Client`` instance as a ``ClientSession`` type. You can improve your

Reviewer: S: "in" the driver seems a little confusing

```suggestion
When using the {+driver-short+}, you can create a new session from a
``Client`` instance as a ``ClientSession`` type. You can improve your
```

   Use a ``ClientSession`` only in operations running on the
   ``Client`` that created it. Using a ``ClientSession`` with a
   different ``Client`` results in operation errors.

Methods
-------

Create a ``ClientSession`` by using the ``start_session()`` method on your
``Client`` instance. You can then modify the session state using the
methods provided by the ``ClientSession`` type. The following table
describes these methods:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :stub-columns: 1
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Description

   * - ``start_transaction()``
     - | Starts a new transaction, configured according to an optional
         ``TransactionOptions`` parameter, on this session. The session
         must be passed into each operation within the transaction, or
         the operation runs outside of the transaction.
       |
       | Errors returned from operations executed within the transaction
         might include a ``TRANSIENT_TRANSACTION_ERROR`` label, which
         indicates that the entire transaction can be retried with the
         expectation that it will succeed.
       |
       | **Parameter**: ``TransactionOptions``

   * - ``commit_transaction()``

>      - | Commits the active transaction for this session. Returns an

Reviewer: S: following the format of most other table descriptions, I think you could keep the first sentence as a fragment but ensure that the following are complete sentences.

```suggestion
     - | Commits the active transaction for this session. This method returns an
```

         error if there is no active transaction for the session or the
         transaction was previously ended.
       |
       | This method might return an error that includes an
         ``UNKNOWN_TRANSACTION_COMMIT_RESULT`` label, which 
         indicates that it is unknown if the committed transaction
         satisfies the set write concern. If you encounter this error,
         it is safe to retry the commit until the write concern is
         satisfied or the method returns an error without the label.

   * - ``abort_transaction()``

>      - | Ends the active transaction for this session. Returns an

Reviewer: S: same suggestion as above (line 78)

         error if there is no active transaction for the session or the
         transaction was committed or ended.

   * - ``with_transaction()``
     - | Starts a transaction on this session and runs the given
         callback, then commits or ends the transaction. When you use
         this method to perform a transaction, the driver automatically

>          handles any errors, so you do not need to implement error

Reviewer: S: for vale reasons

```suggestion
         handles any errors, so you can omit error
```

         handling code.
       |
       | Because the callback returns a future and can be run multiple
         times, the Rust language closure borrowing rules for captured
         values can be restrictive. So, the ``with_transaction()``
         method accepts a context parameter that is passed to the callback.
       |
       | **Parameters**: context ``C``, callback ``FnMut(&'a mut
         ClientSession, &'a mut C)``, ``TransactionOptions``

.. important:: Methods That Can Run in Transactions

   To run MongoDB tasks within transactions, you must use the
   ``_with_session()`` suffixed methods. These methods accept a
   ``ClientSession`` instance as a parameter.

>    For example, to delete a document normally, you can use the

Reviewer: S: I feel like "normally" is a little subjective

```suggestion
   For example, to delete a document, you can generally use the
```

   ``delete_one()`` method. However, to delete a document within
   a transaction, you must use the ``delete_one_with_session()``
   method and pass the session as a parameter.

Example
-------

The following code defines the ``insert_media()`` callback function that
inserts data into the ``books`` and ``films`` collections:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/transaction.rs
   :language: rust
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-callback
   :end-before: end-callback

> The following code performs the following actions to perform the

Reviewer: S: just to avoid repeating "perform"

```suggestion
The following code performs the following actions to complete the
```

transaction:

#. Creates a session from the client by using the ``start_session()`` method.
#. Uses the ``with_transaction()`` method to start a transaction and run
   the ``insert_media()`` callback function within the transaction.

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/transaction.rs
      :language: rust
      :dedent:
      :start-after: begin-session
      :end-before: end-session

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Successfully committed transaction!

> If you need more control over your transactions, the `ClientSession API

Reviewer: S: to avoid need

```suggestion
If you require more control over your transactions, the `ClientSession API
```

.. _rust-transactions:

============
Transactions
============

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: code example, ACID compliance, multi-document

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {driver-short} to perform
**transactions**. Transactions allow you to perform a series of operations
that change data only if the entire transaction is committed.
If any operation in the transaction does not succeed, the driver stops the
transaction and discards all data changes before they ever become
visible. This feature is called **atomicity**.

In MongoDB, transactions run within logical sessions. A
session is a grouping of related read or write operations that you
want to run sequentially. Sessions enable causal consistency for a group

> of operations and allow you to execute operations in an **ACID-compliant**

Reviewer: S: since the style guide doesn't like "execute"

```suggestion
of operations and allow you to run operations in an **ACID-compliant**
```

app's performance by reusing your client for multiple sessions and
transactions instead of instantiating a new client each time.

.. warning::

   Use a ``ClientSession`` only in operations running on the
   ``Client`` that created it. Using a ``ClientSession`` with a
   different ``Client`` results in operation errors.

Methods
-------

Create a ``ClientSession`` by using the ``start_session()`` method on your
``Client`` instance. You can then modify the session state using the
methods provided by the ``ClientSession`` type. The following table
describes these methods:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :stub-columns: 1
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Method
     - Description

   * - ``start_transaction()``
     - | Starts a new transaction, configured according to an optional
         ``TransactionOptions`` parameter, on this session. The session
         must be passed into each operation within the transaction, or
         the operation will run outside of the transaction.
       |
       | Errors returned from operations run within the transaction
         might include a ``TRANSIENT_TRANSACTION_ERROR`` label, which

>          indicates that the entire transaction can be retried with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
         indicates that the entire transaction can be aborted then retried with the
```

If a transaction is not aborted before the retry, calling `start_transaction` on the same session results in a "transaction in progress" error.
